---
layout: post
comments: true
title: The Mothership
date: 2017-08-21
tags:
url: 2017/08/21/The-Mothership.html
identifier: 2017-08-21
---
True space settlement depends on being able to have children out there, including pregnancy, childbirth, and the whole process of raising a happy, healthy child. We know very, very little about what it takes to do this in the harsh environment of space. What we do know suggests that the radiation protection and gravity required is far higher than for an adult. As a mental exercise, let us tackle a chunk of this question. Here follows a sketch of the mother ship - a ship compliant with conservative estimates of the protection needed to safely transport an expectant mother from the Moon to Earth. end-excerpt

First, the setting. There is a point on our timeline, after a pretty large, bustling colony has been set up at Lalande Crater on the Moon's equator, where a small number of young couples intending to have children are accepted into the colony's population. This step is taken after extensive research into pregnancy in higher mammals has been done. For now, let's posit that shows that very early pregnancy is alright in lunar gravity, but normal fetal development requires something close to normal gravity after that. Also, that only a very low level of cosmic radiation is permissible. This gives us a starting point for really thinking about the whole thing, which is what Moonwards is for.

Now, the very limited data there is on mammalian embryos in microgravity mostly show abnormal development. There is no information at all in low gravity like the Moon. A good review of current data is in [Effects of Microgravity on Cell Cytoskeleton and Embryogenesis, by Susan J. Crawford-Young](http://www.ijdb.ehu.es/web/paper.php?doi=10.1387/ijdb.052077sc). Maybe a little gravity really helps, maybe the fact that experiments so far haven't controlled for other factors like elevated radiation and launch stresses means they've over-emphasized microgravity, maybe periodic exposure to higher gravity or other measures can offset problems... What can i say, you have to start somewhere. I have no good response to the low-gravity factor, in particular during the period before pregnancy is even detected. A woman known to be pregnant could be placed in higher simulated gravity for transport, except for a couple of short gaps. Before anyone knows she's pregnant, if a regular Moon lifestyle isn't enough, we're sort of stuck. It would be time to talk about orbital colonies for pregnancy. And i've even started thinking more about that... But first, the mother ship way.

What the mother ship does is block cosmic rays well enough for a pregnant woman to be safe. She would be safe in the colony itself - it's been designed to have plenty of protection. She would also be safe in the space station that anchors the equatorial tether complex. It is huge by the time these events are in play, with plenty of shielding. Same goes for the ship that ferries her from that station to the corresponding station on the other end, in Earth orbit. That ship shuttles between the Moon and Earth by being tossed between the upper tethers of each, it only needs enough engines and fuel for course corrections. So it too is a big thing, designed to carry very heavy loads. And the Earth space station? That one gets started with an actual metal asteroid of worthy size. We're talking about a time when there is major commerce in cislunar space and things like this happen, thus the whole motivation to finally resolve this space-family thing. In all of these locations, our mother-to-be has space to stretch and move, decent medical facilities, and access to a full gravity environment in centrifuges. The mother ship need only get her safely from the Moon's surface to the station in orbit.

So, what level of shielding is needed to be pretty sure the embryo within her is safe? To answer that, let's talk about cosmic radiation, and embryonic development.

The data on exposure in the womb to the type of radiation we are talking about is limited to that [resulting from the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki](http://www.rerf.jp/radefx/index_e.html) - and it still isn't really the same. Below exposures of about 0.5 Gy (half a Gray, which means 0.5 J/kg of radiation) the effects were limited to increased risk of cancer later in life. Effects were severe above about 1 Gy, but we aren't talking about anything close to that. Contrary to popular belief, there was [no increased risk of stillbirths or birth defects](http://www.rerf.jp/radefx/genetics_e/birthdef.html) among children exposed in utero to the a-bombs. Other than these case studies, the only data on exposure of embryos to ionizing radiation is from animal studies. I have found no such study that used radiation more energetic than gamma rays, which is so different there is no point talking about it.




As soon as the expecting mother leaves the shielding protecting the colony from radiation, her child is at serious risk. The concern is cosmic radiation. Other kinds of radiation are both much easier to shield against, and of much less concern. Cosmic radiation is composed of atomic particles traveling at a large fraction of the speed of light, and it is a whooole different thing.

Basically (very basically, because what happens when such a particle passes through matter is highly complex and variable) when such a particle, or particles produced by it by collision, pass through your body, the charge on them causes the electrons on a large number of nearby atoms to be stripped away. That means how they are bonded to surrounding atoms changes. An invisibly thin trail of chemical changes happens along the track of that particle - but it is enough to require repair of damaged structures, especially when DNA is damaged. If that repair is faulty or too slow, illness results. When that damage happens to an embryo, whose cells are dividing at breakneck speed, common sense says that's bad. Really, really bad. We have no data at all but everything we know says that mutations in that embryo will result. That is super dangerous.

Okay, so this means the mother must be properly protected from cosmic rays during her entire trip back to Earth. How might that be done? Hm.

The architecture we have is helpful for large sections of the trip. By this point, there are tether complexes in equatorial orbit around both the Moon and Earth, and they are big. Such complexes allow ships to be tossed back and forth between the tips of their tethers. On the Moon's end, the ship that docks with the tip platform (at the end of the upper tether extending outwards into space from the space station that anchors the whole thing) can be really big. It experiences a constant outward acceleration because the tether tip is moving at faster than orbital velocity, and that feels like about 1/60th of Earth's gravity.  
